So today we will talk about portability.
This is going to be the ultimate guide to portability.
Where you will
get everything related to portability in this video.
What is portability?
Should portability be done or not?
What are its advantages?
What are disadvantages?  And what is the process of portability
?  So we will talk about all this in detail.  Stay tuned
till the end of the video.
Before starting the video, I would like to
introduce myself.  My name is
Goodleen Cotiku.  I am a Certified
Financial Planner.  I have been
associated with the insurance industry for the last 20 years
and every week I bring videos for you so
that your insurance mind journey
becomes easy and happy because the
tagline of our company is also Creating a Wealth
of Happiness.  Let's move on to the video.  But before that,
a quick reminder, if
you haven't subscribed to our channel yet, please do so.
So that you get the right infection at
the right time.  The first question is
what is portability?  So
portability, if we understand it in simple words, is
transfer from one company to another.  So
we are shifting from one service provider to another.  That is
called portability.  This is a very common
example.  Your phone that you use
is the service provider.  Let's have Airtel
, Vodafone, whatever you use.
You move or shift from one service provider to another.
That is called
portability.  Your phone number remains the same
but the service provider changes.
Similarly, health insurance portability
is also a similar concept.  If you are getting better claim
service, better features
, upgraded features, better
pricing then you can shift from one company to
another.  And
all your benefits that you have
availed from the previous service provider will be carried
forward to the new company.
Another term you use is migration.  So let us
also understand what migration is.
Portability and migration
are slightly different from each other.  Portability is
you are moving from one company to another.
Migration happens within the same company.  You are
shifting from one product to another.
Suppose
you do not like the features of a product.  You are
coming to the features of another product.  That is called
migration.  The plan is changing here too.  The
company itself is changing there.  So
what is the difference between the two?  They understand this quickly.
One thing that happened is that
portability is moving to a new company
all together.  New company and new plan.
Migration Moving to a new plan with
the same company.  I am in the same company but am
shifting from one plan to another.
When should you opt in?  You should
opt for that when you
are dissatisfied.  If you are dissatisfied with a plan.   Do
n't you think that my plan
lacks features?  It is an old policy.  So what
will you do?  You will migrate it to a
new policy.  A better version came from the same company.
2.0, 3.0 are better variants than Lets.
You are migrating to that.  That is
called migration.  Now if you are dissatisfied with your policy,
your company and you
want to change the company, then it will be
called portability.  Transition Time
Basically, transition time is
how much time it takes to switch from one plan to another.
When you port, it takes a little more
time because two companies
are involved.  As you move from one company
to another, the underwriting is getting fresh.  We will
talk about that also.  But
if you are moving the same with the same company.
Transition time will be a little less.
Because that company has all your existing
information and
you are moving to another plan of the same company.  Last is
underwriting risk.  So like in migration
you are moving from one plan of the same company to another plan.
Underwriting may or may not be there.
Suppose you have a policy of Rs 10 lakh on the same sum
, plan A,
you are moving to plan B in the same company for Rs 10 lakh.
So there may not be underwriting.
You will also be given benefits here.
Underwriting is basically your medical
history.
What is your medical history at the time you are doing it?   There will be
underwriting or there will not be.  And
chances are that the migration will happen easily.
But what about portability?   The
underwriting is fresh.  You were with A company
which had your policy running for 5 years.
Now you have come to company B.  Now
you paid the first premium to Company B.  Paid only the first
premium.  B Company has the risk of
giving you the claim from day one.  Because
what is portability?  All the benefits are being
carried forward by you.  So
what will B Company do?  Will do the underwriting.
They will check whether you are medically eligible to
take a policy with them.  Not there.   Will
check your risk appetite.  Your pre-
existing conditions will be checked.  Will
check lifestyle habits.  Based on that your
policy will be ported or not.  Now let us
understand what are the advantages and disadvantages of portability.  The
first advantage is that you get a better insurance company.  The one
whose claims are better and whose
features are better.  Whose services you will get better.
Due to which you have shifted from the old company
to the new company, your
service provider service experience has
changed for which you have moved.
When the government introduced portability a
few years ago, its objective was
that if you are dissatisfied
with an insurance company, you have the right as a
consumer to move to another company.  So the
advantage of portability is that your
services become better.  Your
experience gets better with
regards to claims.  You are covered from day one
as your benefits are
carried forward and the service also becomes
better.  The second benefit is that you
get upgraded plans, upgraded features, better services at a lower premium.  This is
also a reason why people quote.  The
premium is getting lower in the
new company and the features are also getting better.
Third, suppose when you took a health insurance
policy, you had taken an old policy 20
years, 25 years ago, at that time it was the best suited
policy.  But as per today's
medical advancement, it is not fit.
Not suitable.  Modern
treatments are not covered by LETS.  AYUSH
is not covered.  Which is needed today.  OPD You
want cover which is not available in your existing policy or the
company from which the existing policy is held.
So that option is available in the new company.
So that is where portability can be
helpful for you.  The next
point is that the waiting period gets carried forward
for pre-existing conditions
and slow-growing illnesses.  So whatever
waiting period you have already served
in the existing company will be carried forward
to the new company.  You have an
existing company where you have been
running the policy for 5 years.  You have already served two years waiting period for your slow growing
illnesses like stone,
cataract, hernia, piles, fibroids, knee
replacement etc.
Pre-
existing condition: Let's assume you have high blood
pressure.  You have already served those three years.
So as soon as you are porting to the new company,
all those waiting
periods are being carried forward by you.
You're covered from Day One.  There will be
no waiting period to be served.  Here, if
you increase the sum assured from a
policy of Rs 10 lakh to Rs 50 lakh and port it to Rs 50 lakh, then the
difference of Rs 40 lakh will attract
waiting periods because it is a
fresh sum assured.  So, the ported sum
assured, the sum assured coming from the old company, will
not have a waiting period.
This is a beneficial thing.  Now
what is the harm?  The first disadvantage will be
underwriting risk.  So it is not your decision but the
policy.  You have chosen that I want to
take the policy.  That is your decision.  But
ultimately the underwriting decision will also matter.
You will either get the policy or not.
We talked about underwriting risk.  The
insurance company will underwrite whether
I should take this policy or not.
Based on your medical condition,
based on your claim history,
based on your lifestyle habits.  So on that
basis it will be decided whether you
can go to the new company or not.  So
underwrite is a risk.  The policy may be
accepted and may be rejected.  There
is nothing in the middle way.  The second drawback is that you may have to
pay a higher premium because
you are porting and getting better features.  There is
also a possibility that you may have to
pay a lower premium.  There is a
possibility that you are going to a better insurance provider
which has a good claim settlement
ratio, if their claim ratio is good
then your premium may also increase.  So that
is a disadvantage.  The third disadvantage is that this
exercise is portability and you
cannot do it in the mid term.  Suppose you are
completely unhappy with your existing
insurance company.  You think in the mid term that
now I should change.  That
is not a possibility.  This is possible only at
the time of renewal.  So
you can do this some time before the policy renewal.   You wo
n't be able to do it in the midterm.  The next
disadvantage is that your loyalty bonus, the
no claim bonus, will
not be carried forward to the new insurance company.
Suppose you have a policy of Rs 10 lakh and
with it there is a no claim bonus of Rs 5 lakh and
you are taking a policy of Rs 10 lakh in the new company,
then only Rs 10 lakh will be carried forward, the
ported sum assured will not be Rs 15 lakh, the
bonus of Rs 5 lakh above that will not be carried forward.
Next we will talk about
what is the process of portability?  So for portability let
you decide that I have to port it.  If you want to
move from one company to another, what is the next
step?  First of all, you can do this only at the time of renewal.  I wo
n't be
able to do mid-term.  You will be able to port only at the time of renewal.
You will not be able to do this between the policy terms.
You can port a few days before renewal.
Generally the window is 45 days.   The
second thing you have to do is reach out to the company you want to port to.
You have to port from LETS
to B company.  You are currently
holding the policy in A.  So you will reach
out to B that I want to port my
policy.  You have to provide the copy of the existing policy
which you already have.  It is possible that
he may ask you for policy copies of 3 or 4 years.
To check the continuity, you have to give that.
You have to fill the proposal form again and submit it
to the new company.  The new proposal form has to be
filled afresh on today's date along with today's medical history and today's lifestyle habits.  That new company will
consider on that basis whether they want to do portability
or not.  So here I would
like to highlight a few more things.  This
will be a matter of process.  Some things that
you have to keep in mind during port time.
What Things to Keep in Mind at the Time
of Portability.  You don't just have to think
that yes, I just want to leave this company.  But
you have to be very careful about some things.   The
earliest medical history.  Your medical
history is most important at the
time of portability.  Many times people assume
that when I am carrying forward, the
company will automatically take the medical history
from the old company.  Doesn't happen like this.
You have to give new medical history.
You have to give all the information afresh.
You have to assume that no
data will be lost from the old company.  You are
telling me what you are telling me.  Because you
know this is a contract of good faith.
So if any such thing is not mentioned then the
blame will fall on the insured.  It will be on the policy
holder that you did not inform
us while logging in the policy.  Secondly, if there is any
claim history or any claim has been made in the old policy, then
please
inform the insurance company.  What happens
?  Many times we forget.  And
what happens when you forget?  After three-four years I realized that
yes, I forgot to tell you.  So at that time the
new company is also not liable to
give you the claim.  He is not obligated.
Because you hid any material information from them.
So the basic rules regarding disclosure
of medical history are equally important in portability.
And one more thing
you have to keep in mind is that when you get the policy
ported and you get the policy
document, then open the policy document and
read whether it contains the
portability details or not.  Has the
inception date of the policy you have ported from the old company arrived or not?   Let's assume that
your policy was running
in this company since 2019.  You shifted to B Company in 2025.
When your policy document is ready, is it possible that
it has
come as a fresh policy?  It should be a ported
policy, so you will check in the policy document
whether the inception date is mentioned as 2019 or
not.  This thing has to be taken care of very carefully
after policy issuance.  So we have
made a detailed video in which we have talked about
things to keep in mind before and
after buying health insurance.  There is a before
moment but the after moment is also equivalent.
And after that keep one more thing in mind.
Suppose your policy has been
ported and you are not satisfied.  Now
you are not happy with something or the other.  Your
medical history was not recorded.   The
inception date is wrong.  You have a free look
period of 30 days.  Now portability
policies also have a free look period.  If
you are not satisfied, you can cancel the free look.
You get your full refund.  So these are some things
that you need to keep in mind for portability.
So these are the details I
wanted to share with you about
what is portability?  What is migration?
What are the pros and cons of portability?
What is the process?  What are some other things
you need to keep in mind?  Are at the time
of portability.  So I am sure this
video is very helpful.  If someone is
looking to port, an attempt has been made to cover everything in one place.  Please
let us know if
you have any questions, any feedback, or
anything that I have not covered,
please share in the comment section. If
you want to connect with our team, our
contact number and email ID are given.  You
can connect.  We also assist with
portability.  And before we go, a quick
reminder, if you haven't subscribed to our channel yet, please do so.
So that you
get the right information at the right time.
See you in the next video, till then stay
safe, take care, bye bye.